Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon.
And Darryl Lenn.
Science Fiction writer George R.R. Martin recently had his third novel, Fever Dream, published
in Hardcover by Poseidon Press.
Fever Dream is a science fictional historical horror novel, which combines the vampire legend
and Mississippi River boats in the antebellum south.
Yes, Martin, why chose to write about a combination of vampires and river boats.
The vampires came first as I was putting the book together.
I had read a firm out about vampires.
I had read other people's vampire novels, of course, Dracula, and the other books, too,
recently.
And I had wanted to do my own version of that legend for some time, because I had a few
ideas about it.
But I didn't want it to be just another Dracula book, just another rehash of the same old
legend.
As we've seen vampire books and the vampire books, they're essentially just the same thing
spun over and over again.
I think that's what tires them.
And at the same time, I was going through all these thoughts about vampires, was the period
that I was living in the Bugaiowa.
I taught college there for three years.
And the bugle, of course, is an old river town.
It was once a big steamboat manufacturing center, and it's still very much a bug with
the history of the great era of steam on the Mississippi.
So it was during that period, while I was in the built that I got interested in the
that period of history I got interested in the steamboat.
I read a fair amount about them.
And once I did, the two things just seemed to come together in my mind.
There's a certain romanticism, I think, a dark romanticism that clings to both the
old steamboats and vampires.
They're both very attractive in a certain sense.
The elegant vampire and the stately, intricate, gorgeous steamboat.
But they also have dark sides too, first.
In fever dreams, the protagonist, Captain Abner Marsh, owner of a failing steamboat company,
the fever river packet line, realizes his lifelong dream of captaining a fast, luxurious steamboat
when it becomes partners with the mysterious Joshua York.
All Marsh has to do to maintain the partnership and keep the fancy steamboat.
It's sail up and down the river and avoid questioning York's somewhat odd habits.
But York begins bringing a board of strange retinue of acquaintances, all of whom have
nocturnal habits.
And of course, Marsh has difficulty staying his curiosity.
As Marsh learns about York and his friends, he discovers they are vampires.
Martin presents vampires in a manner never seen in fantasy.
He explains them in rational terms.
This meant including some of the legendary characteristics of vampires, but leaving
others out.
I wanted to have rationalized vampires.
I wanted to have vampires that I thought could actually exist that were not based on
vague supernatural legends in the down over the years.
So I had to look at each of the particular beliefs associated with vampires.
Now, see, is there any way that I could justify this in a rational manner?
Now, obviously, something about vampires not coming out during day, which the vampires
in my book, Fever Dream, do have that characteristic.
Well, that's very easily explainable.
It's just they're not turnal creatures.
Their skin is extremely sensitive to ultraviolet, so they burn very badly.
If they're exposed to daylight, so they avoid it.
You can justify that easily.
But you look at something that not reflected in mirrors.
I mean, there's no way to justify not being respected mirrors scientifically.
You have to rewrite essentially all the laws governing light and reflection and
refractions, so on.
That's strictly a supermatch on motif, so I had to get rid of that.
Obviously, considering that the book is about vampires on the specific
steamboats, I had to get rid of the one that said they can't cross running water as
well.
I'd say I'll up and down the steamboat all through the book.
More on George Martin's Fever Dream on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Darryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
Science Fiction writer George R.R. Martin's latest novel, Fever Dream, a science fictional
historical horror effort, was recently published in Hardcover by Poseidon Press and distributed
by Simon & Schuster.
As we discussed in our last show, the book combines elements of the vampire legend and
a marked twang-like presentation of Mississippi Riverboat lore.
Joshua York, the partner of Captain Abner Marsh, is a vampire who has managed to concoct
a potion which will alleviate the red thirst.
The scourge which visits the vampires in Martin's novel periodically and drives him into
an uncontrollable state of bloodlust, which can only be satiated by human blood.
Preferably that from young, attractive, living humans.
The humans, by the way, are deprecatingly referred to by some of the vampires as cattle.
The existence of the potion is the key to Martin's novel, that gives the vampires a choice.
They can continue feasting on the blood of the cattle, or they can finally quit terrorizing
the human race and drink only the artificial brew.
This choice is another element which separates Martin's vampires from those of traditional
fantasy.
I suppose as much as anything else, I mean the book is about vampires and Mississippi
River Steamboats, but in a deeper sense, it's about moral choices.
And one of the things that Joshua York, the vampire, says to Abner, Abner Marsh, protagonist
and the abner later says back to him is, you make your choices.
We all make our choices.
If you take the traditional vampire thing, the traditional vampire leaves the traditional
position of the vampire.
You don't have choice.
The vampire is an avatar of undying, ancient and absolutely black evil.
Well, okay, fine, that makes her good entertainment, but as it interacts with the real world,
kind of a hollow construct.
The real world is made up of grades.
We don't have absolute goods, and we don't have absolute evil.
It's a good evil that we have, you know, resides in each of us, and it is a matter of moral
choice.
Damon Julian is a charismatic elder vampire who rejects the potion.
He did make a choice, he wants to go, but he also makes the choice in terms of the book
at the banquet when he essentially rejects what Joshua has to offer.
And he states his opposition to Joshua with saying, you know, we are born, this is what
we are born to be.
Masters over humanity, people who take the lives of those inferior to us.
And this is our nature.
So he is making a choice there.
He's rejecting Joshua's potion, he's rejecting the freedom from the red thirst that Joshua
offers, and he's accepting what he thinks is.
He's a purier nature.
Martin told us that he found a close parallel between Julian's view of the human race,
and slavery as it existed in the South at the time of the book, 1857.
Of course there's also certain, you know, resonance is there with the whole slavery effect,
which I tried to put through all the way through the book.
It takes place in the antebellum South, late antebellum South, and slavery is for some
other hot sand, and the whole master slave thing that existed between black and white and
the South then, has a kind of fantasy, a flexure than relations between vampires and human beings.
This parallel even strikes Abner Marsh as a story progresses.
Abner Marsh is never an evil man.
I think by nature he is a good man, but he is a man at the beginning of the book who's
essentially just living his own life.
And the great moral issues of his time, like slavery, are things he kind of hashes out
over the dinner table, but never has any great personal involvement in.
But as a result of the whole experience with the steamer fever dream, and the things
happen to him, I think Marsh changes and becomes an essence man is much more aware of
the necessity to make moral choices.
We're on George Martin's fever dream on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon, and Darryl Lane.
Science Fiction author George R.R. Martin's latest novelist fever dream, a science fictional
historical horror story about vampires and Mississippi riverboats.
Darryl Martin explains the title of the book.
Okay that explains the origin of fever dream, but where did the oddly spelled fever originate?
It has to do with Captain Marsh's birthplace.
He was born in Galina, Illinois.
And the river, Galina is located on a small tributary that comes off Mississippi, which originally
was named the fever river, F-E-V-R-E river, in the early 1800s.
And Marsh, of course, was born during that period and grew up calling it.
In point of fact, and this is all historically true, the name of that river was changed
to the Galina river fairly early on, because the town got respectable and they didn't want
people thinking they were all sick there.
But I thought there would be better to call it the Galina river.
But Galina was a very important steveboat town, and the fever in its early days, today
it's nothing but a creek, it's completely silted off and I've visited it and you can get
a railroad, a habit, let alone a major steamer.
But in the early 1800s, Galina was a major steveboat port, and the fever or the Galina river
as it later became was a very bustling little tributary indeed.
We asked Martin if there were actual steveboats as fast and as luxurious as the fever dream.
The dimensions of the fever dream and the capacity of our engines and so forth are modeled
very closely on the equips.
In terms of the brook, the equips is the queen of the river, the fastest, largest, most luxurious
boat, and it's the one Abner Marsh aspires to this place as fast as steamer on the river
and that's why it builds the fever dream.
The equips was a real historical boat of its era, the 1850s, and was considered the fastest
boat of that era.
It did indeed win a very famous steveboat race against the shot well.
Some people, including Mark Twain, put forward evidence that the fever dream was in fact
the fastest steamer ever on the river.
The new related steamer is in the 1870s and the 1880s, that while they were not perhaps
as fast as the fever dream and the brook or the equips in real life were even more luxurious
like the J.M. White, very fast and incredibly luxurious steamer of the 1870s, 1880s.
One of the interesting facts that strikes the readers, their riverboats, were extremely
short-lived.
That was one of the interesting things that turned up when I was researching at that kind
of startle me too.
I mean, there's such formidable looking structures.
You'd think they'd be around for ages, but in fact, they had a shorter lifespan than the
modern car.
Martin headed to considerable research on steamboats to ensure the accuracy of historical details
in fever dream.
It took me two years to do fever dream altogether.
The first year of that was largely research.
So a lot of research did go into it.
I think that's an necessity if you're going to adjust it to any sort of historical fiction.
Peaver dream, of course, is historical horror, but I still thank you to all your readers
that get them acturously in so far as a capable woman.
Or with George Martin on our next show.
This has been the science fiction radio show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the science fiction radio show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Darryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
One of the most popular genres in mass market literature is the horror genre.
We ask science fiction author George R.R. Martin, author of the recently published horror
novel, Fever Dream.
Why thanks to the horror genre is currently so successful?
I think people may be going to horror because in horror novels we're scared, but we can
kind of control the scares.
And we can read the book and scare ourselves.
But then we put down the book and we know that what we're afraid of vampires were wolves,
haunted hotels, whatever is not real.
And people don't mind dealing with that and kind of getting a little catharsis out of
that.
But they don't want to deal with real terrifying things, violence and streets and crime and
crazed psychos out there.
And the threat of nuclear holocaust and all of the other more real fears that also hang
over us.
I think that may be part of it.
There are many creatures that embody horror in the literature.
Ghosts, monsters, ghouls, werewolves, witches.
But probably the most enduring image of horror is the vampire, the nocturnal stalker who drinks
the blood of its unwary victims.
The vampire legend spans many cultures.
Here Martin tells us about the vampire legend and the reasons why the legend may be so popular
even now.
Vampires are an almost universal legend, which is one thing that turned out when I was researching
fever dream.
The vampires we're familiar with, of course, Dracula and his kin, so to speak, and all
the books that are derived from that tradition are essentially retraces of Eastern European
Romanian and Hungarian largely vampire legends.
But if you look around the world, you'll find vampire legends everywhere.
In China, in Africa, in the South seas, there are variants of the vampire legend.
The details differ.
But the basic vision of a nocturnal predator that trades on human beings is present in all
of these.
So that would lead you to wonder why do they have this universal appeal.
The easy answer is to why they're appealing in our culture today in modern American mass
society, I think, as the sexual nature of the vampire.
The sexual symbolism embodied in Dracula and in the way it's been treated by Hollywood
and the symbolism of vampires, the dubtor, is appealed something within us and makes
gives legend a lot more resonances than say the werewolf legend or zombies or some of
the other things that have never really achieved the popularity of the vampire legend.
But then you could say well that's true for us, but it doesn't explain why the legend
is so universal around the world.
And indeed it doesn't, but I don't have an answer to that.
One tells us here how we incorporated this universal transcultural concept of the vampire
and fever dream.
In terms of fever dream, I looked at that universality and I made it one of the bases when I started
writing the novel, I said, what if the reason that these legends are universal is because
they're all remembering the same thing.
They're all remembering some kind of racial memory of a real man-like predatory animal,
a drinking, that is somehow the basis for all the vampire legends.
And that was the premise that I, of course, used in the fever dream.
This has been the science fiction radio show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.